🧠 What is Garbage Collection?

Garbage Collection (GC) is the name given to the automatic memory management in java
It is an automatic process of removing unreferenced objects from the JVM’s Heap memory.
It helps in memory management by cleaning up space occupied by objects that are no longer accessible.
GC is built into the JVM and is handled internally using Garbage Collector threads.

🧹 Why is Garbage Collection Important?

Frees up memory automatically, preventing memory leaks.
Makes Java a robust and memory-safe programming language.
Reduces the need for manual memory management like in C/C++ (malloc, free).

✅ Key Features of Garbage Collector
Automatic: 
No need to manually deallocate memory.
Daemon Thread: 
GC runs in the background as a low-priority thread.
Non-deterministic: 
No guarantee when GC will run — it’s controlled by the JVM.

🔍 Basic Example
--------------------------------------------------
package in.xyz;

public class Student {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Student s1 = new Student();  // Object created
        s1 = null;                   // Object becomes unreferenced
        System.gc();                 // Suggest GC to run
    }
    @Override
    protected void finalize() throws Throwable {
        System.out.println("finalize() called...");
    }
}
----------------------------------------------------
📝 Explanation:
s1 = null; → the Student object becomes unreachable.
System.gc(); → requests the JVM to run GC (but not guaranteed).
If GC runs, it calls the object’s finalize() method before deleting it.

🔍 Difference Between runFinalization() and finalize()

runFinalization() -> Suggests JVM to run finalize() on objects pending finalisation(called explicitly by the programmer)
finalize() -> Called by the JVM during Garbage collection to clean up the resources if present from the memory before an object is garbade collected.

🔧 How to Request Garbage Collection?
Java provides two methods to suggest garbage collection:

System.gc();                  // 1. Static method
Runtime.getRuntime().gc();   // 2. Via Runtime class

❗ Note: These calls only request GC; the JVM may choose to ignore them.

🔁 How Does GC Work Internally in JVM?

Garbage Collection in JVM typically follows these phases:

1. Stop the World
When GC starts it will trigger STOP THE WORLD (all running threads will be stopped for few milli secs)
2. Marking
GC identifies which objects are still reachable (referenced).
Unreferenced objects are marked for deletion.
3. Sweeping
The marked (unreachable) objects are removed from heap memory.
4. Compaction
After removal, memory holes are created.
GC reorganizes memory, moving live objects to fill gaps (improves memory locality).

📌 Lifecycle of an Object in Java Memory
Object created and stored in Heap.
If it becomes unreachable (no reference points to it), it becomes eligible for GC.
Before removal, GC may call the object’s finalize() method (deprecated in newer Java versions).
Object is deleted and memory is reclaimed.

💡 When Does an Object Become Eligible for GC?
An object becomes eligible for garbage collection if:
It is explicitly set to null.
It goes out of scope.
It is part of an island of objects with no external references.
The object is referenced only by weak references.

❌ Why finalize() is Deprecated?
Unpredictable behavior.
Not guaranteed to be called.
Can cause performance issues and memory leaks.

Instead, use:
AutoCloseable / try-with-resources for resource management.
Cleaner API (Java 9+).

⚠️ Limitations of GC
GC can pause application threads (Stop-The-World).
No control over when it will execute.
May cause performance drops in real-time systems.
📊 Popular Garbage Collectors in JVM
Zoom image will be displayed

Best Practices for Garbage Collection
1. Choose the Right Garbage Collector: Based on your application’s requirements (throughput vs. latency).
2. Optimize Object Creation: Minimize unnecessary object creation.
3. Manage Heap Size: Ensure appropriate heap size to avoid frequent GC pauses.
4. Monitor GC Performance: Regularly analyze GC logs and adjust JVM parameters as needed.
5. Use Efficient Data Structures: Choose the right data structures to minimize memory usage.

Conclusion
Garbage collection is a crucial component of Java’s memory management system, ensuring that unused objects are automatically removed from memory. 
Understanding how garbage collection works and the different types of garbage collectors available can help you optimize your applications for better performance and stability. 
By following best practices and tuning GC parameters, you can ensure efficient memory management and improve the overall performance of your Java applications.
